how-to for setting up the lighting device on Nordic nrf52840 dongle (#25)
canonical/openthread-border-router-snap: Thread-device.md

## How to Set Up a Matter Thread Lighting Device on Nordic nRF52840 Dongle

This guide demonstrates how to build and flash a Matter Thread lighting application firmware onto a Nordic Semiconductor nRF52840 Dongle, 
thereby transforming the dongle into a Matter Thread device.

Complete the following steps to build and flash the firmware:

### Environment Setup
- Ubuntu 23.04 OS
- nRF52840 dongle

### Version tested in this guide
- Nordic Semiconductor's nRF Connect for Desktop: 4.2.0
- Nordic Semiconductor's nRF Connect SDK: 2.4.2

> - [Matter](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip) SDK: 1.1.0.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Matter](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip SDK): 1.1.0.1
```

### 1. Setting up the Build Environment for nRF Connect SDK and Matter SDK

First, follow [Using native shell for setup](https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/tree/v1.1.0.1/examples/lighting-app/nrfconnect#using-native-shell-for-setup)
guide's steps 1 and 2 to install `nRF command-line tools`, `GN meta-build system`, and `nRF Connect SDK`.

Once nRF Desktop is installed, change its permissions, install dependencies, and run it:
```bash
chmod +x nrfconnect-4.2.0-x86_64.appimage
sudo apt install libfuse2
./nrfconnect-4.2.0-x86_64.appimage
```

> In nRF Connect for Desktop, install the latest `toolchain manager` and `nRF Connect SDK v2.4.2`. 

Reviewer: These should not be codified. 
```suggestion
In nRF Connect for Desktop, install the latest **Toolchain Manager** and **nRF Connect SDK v2.4.2**. 
```

> In nRF Connect for Desktop, install the latest `toolchain manager` and `nRF Connect SDK v2.4.2`. 

Author: Updated to: "In nRF Connect for Desktop, first, install Toolchain Manager. Then, open Toolchain Manager to install nRF Connect SDK v2.4.2."

> After installations, click the down arrow next to the nRF Connect SDK version you installed and select `Open Terminal` or `Open Bash`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After installations, click the down arrow next to the nRF Connect SDK version you installed and select **Open Terminal** or **Open Bash**.
```

> ### 2. Installing and Activating Matter SDK:

Reviewer: Section headings do not need colons.
```suggestion
### 2. Installing and Activating Matter SDK
```

Install the Matter SDK with a shallow clone for the Linux platform:
```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip.git --depth=1 --branch=v1.1.0.1
cd ~/connectedhomeip/
scripts/checkout_submodules.py --shallow --platform linux

> git submodule update --init

Reviewer: These two commands work against each other. The first command makes a shallow clone of Linux platform projects, the second makes a deep clone of everything.

I'll do some further testing to see if the first command has any extra effect.

Author: Does `git submodule update --init` perform a deep clone?  It only initializes and updates submodules. 

 a deep clone of submodules will be `git submodule update --init --recursive`

Reviewer: By setting `--recursive`, it will update also the nested submodules; it isn't about the history depth. 
The shallow/deep history isn't affecting functionality for the build, but just the size of the history.

Anyway, the second command clones all submodules and the first one just the ones for Linux platform. What we want here is indeed all modules, or only those relevant to this build.

```

> 

Reviewer: If you get `ImportError: libffi.so.7: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory` during activation, install libffi7 as described [here](https://askubuntu.com/a/1300763/366811).

Activate Matter build environment:
```bash
cd ~/connectedhomeip/

# Skip all non-core Python requirements:

> sed -i '/^-r requirements/ s/./#&/' ./scripts/setup/requirements.txt

Reviewer: Missing an explanation on why this is needed here (i.e. the python incompatibility error preventing the build later on).

> source scripts/activate.sh

Reviewer: I am getting the following error:
```
File "/home/farshid/ncs/v2.4.2/connectedhomeip/.environment/pigweed-venv/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pw_rpc/internal/packet_pb2.py", line 33, in <module>
    _descriptor.EnumValueDescriptor(
  File "/home/farshid/ncs/toolchains/1f9b40e71a/usr/local/lib/python3.8/site-packages/google/protobuf/descriptor.py", line 796, in __new__
    _message.Message._CheckCalledFromGeneratedFile()
TypeError: Descriptors cannot not be created directly.
If this call came from a _pb2.py file, your generated code is out of date and must be regenerated with protoc >= 3.19.0.
If you cannot immediately regenerate your protos, some other possible workarounds are:
 1. Downgrade the protobuf package to 3.20.x or lower.
 2. Set PROTOCOL_BUFFERS_PYTHON_IMPLEMENTATION=python (but this will use pure-Python parsing and will be much slower).

More information: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/news/2022-05-06#python-updates

The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/home/farshid/ncs/v2.4.2/connectedhomeip/.environment/pigweed-venv/bin/pw", line 8, in <module>
    sys.exit(main())
  File "/home/farshid/ncs/v2.4.2/connectedhomeip/.environment/pigweed-venv/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pw_cli/__main__.py", line 41, in main
    pw_command_plugins.register()
  File "/home/farshid/ncs/v2.4.2/connectedhomeip/.environment/pigweed-venv/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pw_cli/pw_command_plugins.py", line 64, in register
    _register_builtin_plugins(_plugin_registry)
  File "/home/farshid/ncs/v2.4.2/connectedhomeip/.environment/pigweed-venv/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pw_cli/pw_command_plugins.py", line 41, in _register_builtin_plugins
    registry.register_by_name('test', 'pw_unit_test.test_runner', 'main')
  File "/home/farshid/ncs/v2.4.2/connectedhomeip/.environment/pigweed-venv/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pw_cli/plugins.py", line 303, in register_by_name
    Plugin.from_name(name, module_name, member_name, source)
  File "/home/farshid/ncs/v2.4.2/connectedhomeip/.environment/pigweed-venv/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pw_cli/plugins.py", line 104, in from_name
    raise Error(f'Failed to import module "{module_name}"') from err
pw_cli.plugins.Error: Failed to import module "pw_unit_test.test_runner" (TypeError: Descriptors cannot not be created directly.
If this call came from a _pb2.py file, your generated code is out of date and must be regenerated with protoc >= 3.19.0.
If you cannot immediately regenerate your protos, some other possible workarounds are:
 1. Downgrade the protobuf package to 3.20.x or lower.
 2. Set PROTOCOL_BUFFERS_PYTHON_IMPLEMENTATION=python (but this will use pure-Python parsing and will be much slower).

More information: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/news/2022-05-06#python-updates)
```
It can be avoided by setting the environment variable suggested in the error message:
`PROTOCOL_BUFFERS_PYTHON_IMPLEMENTATION=python source scripts/activate.sh`

```
### 3. Building the Matter Lighting Example Firmware:
By default, support for DFU (Device Firmware Upgrade) using Matter OTA is enabled.

> To ensure successful firmware building for the dongle, utilize the following command, considering that nRF52840 dongle doesn't have the external flash required for DFU:

Reviewer: Hard to follow.
```suggestion
This needs to be disabled for the nRF52840 dongle because it doesn't have the external flash required for DFU:
```

```bash
cd examples/lighting-app/nrfconnect
west build -b nrf52840dongle_nrf52840 -- -DCONF_FILE=./prj_no_dfu.conf
```

> 

Reviewer: I got an error here suggesting that I should upgrade my environment by running `/home/farshid/ncs/v2.4.2/connectedhomeip/scripts/setup/nrfconnect/update_ncs.py --update`. It resolved the error.

```suggestion

Note that the build may fail, suggesting an upgrade of the NCS environment via a given command. Executing the command upgrades the environment and resolves the error.
```

The output `zephyr.hex` file will be available at: `~/connectedhomeip/examples/lighting-app/nrfconnect/build/zephyr/zephyr.hex`.

### 4. Flashing the Firmware on the Dongle using nRF Desktop:

Refer to the "Programming the nRF52840 Dongle" section in [nRF Connect Programmer](https://infocenter.nordicsemi.com/index.jsp?topic=%2Fug_nc_programmer%2FUG%2Fnrf_connect_programmer%2Fncp_introduction.html) 
guide to flash the firmware on the dongle.

If you encounter the issue "Could not properly detect an unknown device. Please make sure you have nrf-udev installed," 
then install nrf-udev from [here](https://github.com/NordicSemiconductor/nrf-udev).

Upon successful flashing, logs will display:
```bash
Uploading image through SDFU: 100%
All DFU images have been written to the target device
Target device closed
```

### 5. Running the Matter Thread Lighting Device:

> Connect the dongle to a USB port, then use `minicom` to run the lighting app:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connect the dongle to a USB port, then use `minicom` to open a serial consol and start the lighting app:
```
